.\" $Id: accents.man,v 1.3 1997/05/13 14:01:41 richard Exp $
.TH accents 1 "$Date: 1997/05/13 14:01:41 $" "Linux"
.SH NAME
accents \- a system for parsing/correcting the cantillation marks of
machine-readable biblical texts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B accents
[\-e] [\-p] [filename ...]
.br
.B accents
[-h]
.br
.B accents
[-v]
.PP
If no filenames are given on the command-line,
.B accents
reads stdin.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B Accents 
parses the cantillation marks of the prose sections of the Hebrew
Bible, producing (optional) phrase-structure trees for each verse, and
flagging errors as it finds them.
.PP
.B Accents 
is designed to be small and efficient, of use mainly to editors
correcting machine-readable texts during the production process.  It
may also prove useful to accentual concordance writers, and to
Hebraists and cantors interested in the overall structure of the
Bible's accentual system.
.PP
Currently
.B accents 
can only accept the Michigan-Claremont machine-readable version of
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia, in Unix newline format, as its input.
It is not difficult, however, to rewrite its lexical analyzer for
other formats and input sources.  See the
.IR lex(1) 
source file (tnk2acc.l) for details.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.br
.B \-e	
report only verses with errors
.br
.B \-p	
print accentual parse tree
.br
.B \-h	
print usage message and version number, then exit
.br
.B \-v	
print version number, then exit
.br
.B \-d	
(for debugging purposes only)
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
.IR yacc(1),
.IR (f)lex(1).
.SH LIMITATIONS
.PP
Some versions of 
.IR (f)lex(1) 
do not appear to handle MS-DOS/Windows-format text files correctly.
To alleviate this problem, strip all carriage returns from your input
files before processing them with 
.B Accents\.
.PP
Note also that the grammar 
.B accents 
uses is more powerful than it theoretically ought to be, because, in
reality, the Tiberian accentual system is not an LR language.  There
are various proximity restrictions, ambiguities, and co-occurrence
rules that place outside the range of a normal LR parser.  To squeeze
it into the LR mold, making it possible to analyze it using a parser
generated by
.IR yacc(1),
the underlying grammar had to be expanded to allow a few constructs
that, strictly speaking, should be rejected.
.SH AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.PP
.B Accents
was inspired, in part, by the work of G. E. Weil and James Price.  I
have also incorporated many suggestions made by Henry Churchyard.
.PP
Send bug reports to <richard@goerwitz.com>.  If you find you can
reproduce a bug exactly, and are feeling adventurous, try reproducing
it with the
.RI -d 
(debug) option turned on.  Save the resulting output along with your
bug report, and send it to me.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
Copyright 1995 by Richard Goerwitz.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY, of any kind, including an implied warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307,
USA.
.RE
